The interesting thing is, and I have to remind you
of, while HUD missed the opportunity to become a
central timing agency for whatever reason,
the old Bureau of Public Roads and its successor,
the U.S. Department of Transportation,
particularly the Highway Administration, the
Mass Transportation Administration, stepped
in. very boldly, and had it not been for the old
Bureau of Public Works and its insistence on what
you and I call comprehensive planning as part of
the Transition Study, planning would have
vanished altogether. It didn't come from out.
They didn't know what to do with it or what to do. It
was really the engineers who said, you've got to
have a plan It was people like Siegel saying, how
can you go out there and confront the public if you
don't have anything to show for that you thought
about it and that this is a rational thing? You've
got to do that. You can't just go spend money. And it
was that simple, common sense, political
instinct that saved planning, and then we had the
planning requirements and the early
transportation acts, and it happened to this day.
And interestingly enough, Nixon
didn't go out of his way to do positive things in
urban areas. He nevertheless is really
responsible for the regional councils. They had
this feeble attempt of local coordination, and it
wouldn't work. And it was under the Nixon
administration that the presidential edict was
declared from now on. Every project that is
federally financed has to be okayed by some
regional entity, council, governments,
whatever, that represents elected officials.
This is not good, but it is better than nothing.
You're talking about A-95? Yeah, when it got
started. It came out of the Nixon administration.
Well, it actually started in Kennedy's.
But it didn't have any... There was a secret memo,
actually, that came... from Office of Management
and Budget, but it never got outside of the Bureau.
But it was searching for something like that. And
then it eventually, it had to happen. There were
too many federal programs that were going in
different directions. And what was wrong with all
of that stuff initially was that the people who
served on these regional entities, planning
entities, whatever they were, had no power to
commit their own constituent governance. And
Nixon changed that by a simple directive that, I
forget the number of that, but he said that the
governing boards of regional councils had to be
composed of elected officials. And they had to be
in proportion to the entities that they
represented. And while this did not happen, legal
force beyond that it nevertheless had a very
practical political impact in that it brought the
legislative bodies of the municipalities and
governing bodies of counties in a given region
into the accountability process well you voted
for it and the man serving on the regional council
wasn't just there as citizen shorts he was there as
Councilman Schultz, who represented the Council
of Central City. Victor Jones had a large part to
play in recommending that to the feds from the
Institute of Governmental Affairs in Berkeley.
So I think there will be a strengthening of these
kinds of agencies anyway, and I think with all this
continued demand for people. Now, another
interesting thing with the Tax Reform Act, The
time period when real estate development was
financed largely by people who had a need for tax
shelter was over. Consequently, the individual
investor is placed in a weak position vis-a-vis
the institutional investor, particularly the
pension funds and the insurance companies, who
will now pretty much control the flow of capital
into real estate development. And one of the
consequences of this, I believe, and others have
said the same thing, that will be a substantial
professionalizing of real estate activities.
There will be no more of this good old boy routine
with young men operating in the seat of his pens,
but a serious developer who will have a competent
staff, that competent staff will deal
effectively with the staff of the pension fund
that is equally competent. And they will very
critically examine propositions, approvals,
participation, so that the quality of
development should be higher in the next 30, 40
years than it has been. And from our point of view,
the point of view of academic institutions, a
greater responsibility to produce more
adequately trained individuals at the master's
level and the doctoral level who can perform these
functions. Yeah, it seems too that academia can
pick up another void, and that would be to assist in
monitoring the market and to make reliable data
available to developers on the current status of
the market. Yeah, centers such as ours and the Real
Estate Research Center and others are doing that.
And a third of our work in the Center for Urban
Affairs is exactly that. We did recently this
summer here in San Antonio, trying to identify and
establish a reliable database for all available
residential lots that are now on the market.
Things of that sort are very important. I think you
hit on something that's critical for our
existence and for the development community and
the real estate community, that we will finally
agree that the database that we all use should be
uniform and above board. an objective database
and everybody uses it and so consequently
decisions based on that should be much more
objective. It's interesting in the greater
Houston area now the Houston-Galveston Area
Council is providing that function and all the
municipalities including Houston have agreed
that they will use the database and the forecasts
that are generated by HGAC. so that they don't end
up with two forecasts like the state of Texas has.
So to sum up the question, I think the future has
never been better for planning entities in the
academic environment. We combine planning with
research and practice, and you can't ask for more.
How do you feel to go on to a somewhat different
variation of this topic, how do you feel about the
fact that we have three planning degree granting
programs in Texas?
Well, traditionally the University of Texas has
followed different
policies and educational philosophies.
For whatever reason,
Texas A&M has been recognized as the planning
program that is primarily physical planning,
also deals with social aspects, but it deals with
it in the sense of
developing potential management personnel that
have the skills of dealing with all these issues
immediately. University of Texas is a more, I
think, broad general education type institution
that is not overly concerned with applicability
of skills. The person goes through that, maybe
educated person in some way, but is not a skillful
person. In our programs, you only want to produce a
school for the persons who are also educated.
That's the University of Texas in Austin. I was
really quite surprised to learn that they offer no
course in the history of planning in Texas. They
don't even think of themselves, and that's a very
interesting observation, because they really
don't think of themselves as founding
professionals as we do. For instance, as far as I
know, there's only one member of the faculty who
even holds membership in the American Institute
of Certified Planners. And that's rather
strange. University of Texas in Arlington has
never been able to overcome its image as a
community college, in a sense. They have all kinds
of advanced degrees, but it is essentially dead.
And also, they've been periodically
troubled severely by total reorganization
within the university structure, which
essentially sets them back substantially every
time it happens. So, I haven't paid a lot of
attention to UTI, but I have no really education to
deal with that, because it just seemed to be, in
other words, a threat to us And UT Austin has never
been a threat to us either. As a matter of fact, we
rather enjoy a cordial, collegiate relationship
with the University of Texas in Austin and send
each other students. It's not unusual for someone
to come here and say, Professor so-and-so at
Austin suggested that I should perhaps talk to you
because your program seems to be more to my liking.
And we've done the same. It's just a different
orientation. UT Arlington, I think, enjoys a
superb location for a department of planning.
They should be able to do better than Austin and
Power Station. They should be on top of the world.
But they don't. And interestingly enough,
University of Houston had never even attempted to
deal with planning. It's hostile to it. Rice has a
few courses that they call planning, and they're
pretty good, but no degree. Texas Southern has
dabbled in it, but that's been almost a scandal.
Wolf, I want to thank you very much for your time and
for this interview. You're welcome.